---
layout: post
title: "Install Ubuntu 13.10 on top of encrypted lvm"
author: Janne Haapsaari
date: 2014-03-18 20:08:00
comments: true
categories: Ubuntu encryption lvm
cover:  "assets/header_image.jpg"
---

### Introduction
Ubuntu's installer provides a simple option for installing on top of encrypted
lvm. The option however does not allow to modify partition layout and that for
me is a showstopper. The other option is to create an encrypted container for
all the partitions which works fine but then one has to enter the passphrase
to each and every device individually.

This guide explains how to install ubuntu on top of an encrypted lvm and also
give user the power of specifying partition layout. Using LVM makes it
possible to specify partition sizes and unlock the encrypted device with a
single passphrase. The alternative is to use encrypted devices for each
partition and store keyfiles, that are used to unlock the other devices, on
the root device.

In this example I'm installing Ubuntu on my laptop with a single SSD drive but
this guide can be adapted to work on other distributions as well. I started by
creating two partitions */dev/sda1* and */dev/sda2*. The former will not be
encrypted and will be mounted as /boot in our system. The latter partition will
be encrypted and used as base for our lvm setup.

### Partitioning
To do the actual partitioning the Ubuntu live environment provides gparted,
disks and fdisk. Choose whichever suits you best or install an alternative
from the repositories.

### Filesystems
Now that you've created the partitions described in the previous chapter it's
time to write filesystems on them. I'm still prefering ext4 instead of btrfs
but your free to chose your favorite.

    sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda1
    sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda2

### LUKS container

The cryptsetup package shipping with Ubuntu 13.10 still uses the cbc-essiv
cipher mode. The current cryptsetup package has since then switched to use
aes-xts-plain64 mode. The default values are also plenty safe so do as you
wish, just pick a really good passphrase. Also the cryptsetup package will
be upgraded in Ubuntu 14.04 to use the values I specify here by default.

1. Create the LUKS container

        sudo cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 --key-size 512 --hash sha512 /dev/sda2

    Verify the command with YES in capital letters. Then write your passphrase
    twice.

2. Open the LUKS container.

        sudo cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda2 luks_container

### Create LVM volumes

1. Create LVM physical volume

        sudo pvcreate /dev/mapper/luks_container

2. Create LVM volume group

        sudo vgcreate vg_system /dev/mapper/luks_container

3.  Create logical volumes
    You can think of logical volumes as partitions. I will create two
    partitions, one for root and one for home. If you need a swap space then you
    can create one for yourself now. The root partition will be 40GB and home
    shall have all the remaining space.

        sudo lvcreate -n lv_root -L 40G vg_system
        sudo lvcreate -n lv_home -l 100%FREE vg_system

4.  Write filesystems on the logical volumes

        sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/vg_system-lv_root
        sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/vg_system-lv_home

### Installation of Ubuntu
Use the graphical installer to install Ubuntu like always. If you don't know
how to install Ubuntu then google some of the many fine guides. During the
filesystem layout options, clikc *something else* and choose the logical
volumes we just created. Mount them as / and /home. Do not forget to add
regular unencrypted partition */dev/sda1* to /boot. Otherwise you will not be
able to boot later on.

The important thing is to **NOT** restart the machine when the installation
finishes! Click *continue testing* as we are not yet done.

### Where the magic happens
No it's time for the tricky part.

1.  Find out the UUID of your encrypted luks container

        sudo blkid /dev/sda2
        /dev/sda2: UUID="93xbb3a7-9x55-4kb1-87ce-7f1l6l45cv4af" TYPE="crypto_LUKS"

    Write the UUID down as we will need it later.

2. Mount the logical volumes chroot to it

        sudo mkdir /mnt/root
        sudo mount /dev/mapper/vg_system-lv_root /mnt/root
        sudo mount /dev/mapper/vg_system-lv_home /mnt/root/home
        sudo mount --bind /dev /mnt/root/dev
        > chroot /mnt/root
        > mount -t proc proc /proc
        > mount -t sysfs sys /sys
        > mount -t devpts devpts /dev/pts

    After this point all the commands are run in the chrooted environment!

3. Create file */etc/crypttab* in the chrooted environment with following line.
Replace the UUID with the UUID of your luks container.

        # <target name> <source device> <key file> <options>
        luks_container UUID=93xbb3a7-9x55-4kb1-87ce-7f1l6l45cv4af none luks,retry=1,lvm=vg_system

4. Create a file named */etc/initramfs-tools/conf.d/cryptroot* in the chrooted
environment with following line. Replace the UUID with your luks containers
UUID.


        CRYPTROOT=target=luks_container,source=/dev/disk/by-uuid/93xbb3a7-9x55-4kb1-87ce-7f1l6l45cv4af

5. Update your initrd image.

        update-initramfs -k all -c

6. Edit file named */etc/default/grub* and find a line that looks like this

        GRUB_CMDLINE_LINX=""

    And replace it with following. Again replace the UUID with the one your luks
    container.

        GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX="cryptopts=target=luks_system,source=/dev/disk/by-uuid/93xbb3a7-9x55-4kb1-87ce-7f1l6l45cv4af,lvm=vg_system"

7. Update GRUB config with following command

        update-grub

Reboot your machine and you should be prompted for password.
